Add Ethereum Governance learn page [Closes #3640] (#3769)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/governance/index.md

---
title: Ethereum Governance
description: An introduction to how decisions about Ethereum are made.
lang: en
sidebar: true
---

# Introduction to Ethereum Governance {#introduction}

> _If no one owns Ethereum, how are decisions about past and future changes to Ethereum made? Ethereum Governance refers to the process that allows such decisions to be made_

Reviewer: Should "Ethereum Governance" be capitalized as if it's a proper noun?

Author: Probably not

## What is Governance? {#what-is-governance}

The Cambridge dictionary defines governance as:

> _the way that organizations or countries are managed at the highest level, and the systems for doing this_

> In essence, it is the systems in place that allows decisions to be made. In a typical organizational structure, the directors' board has the final say in decision-making. In a political system, elected officials advocate for bills that best represent their constituent's desires.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In essence, governance is the system in place that allows decisions to be made. In a typical organizational structure, the executive team or a directors' board may have the final say in decision-making. In a political system, elected officials may enact legislation that attempts to represent their constituent's desires.
```

## Decentralized Governance {#decentalized-governance}

> No one person owns the Ethereum protocol, but decisions still need to be made about implementing changes best to ensure the longevity and prosperity of the network. This lack of ownership makes traditional organizational governance an incompatible solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No one person owns the Ethereum protocol, but decisions still need to be made about implementing changes to best ensure the longevity and prosperity of the network. This lack of ownership makes traditional organizational governance an incompatible solution.
```

## Ethereum Governance {#ethereum-governance}

> Ethereum Governance is the process by which protocol changes are made. It's important to point out that this process isn't related to how people and applications use the protocol - Ethereum is permissionless. Anyone from anywhere in the world can participate in on-chain activities. There are no rules set for who can or cannot build an application or send a transaction. However, there is a process to propose changes to the core protocol, which these applications run on top of. Since so many people depend on Ethereum's stability, there is a very high coordination threshold for core changes, including social and technical processes, to ensure any changes to Ethereum are secure and acceptable to the community

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ethereum Governance is the process by which protocol changes are made. It's important to point out that this process isn't related to how people and applications use the protocol - Ethereum is permissionless. Anyone from anywhere in the world can participate in on-chain activities. There are no rules set for who can or cannot build an application or send a transaction. However, there is a process to propose changes to the core protocol, which these applications run on top of. Since so many people depend on Ethereum's stability, there is a very high coordination threshold for core changes, including social and technical processes, to ensure any changes to Ethereum are secure and widely supported by the community
```

> ### Off-chain vs On-chain governance {#off-chain-vs-on-chain}

Reviewer: I think this section might be easiest to understand by first explaining what on-chain governance means vs. first defining off-chain (which is what most people are already familiar with).

e.g. blockchain technology allows for new governance capabilities, for instance token voting.

Author: Agreed. Do you think this makes sense:

Original:
> Ethereum Governance happens off-chain. Off-chain governance means that any protocol change decisions happen through an informal process of social discussion, which, if approved, would be implemented in code.
> 
> The opposite approach, on-chain governance, is when proposed protocol changes are decided by a stakeholder vote, usually by holders of a governance token, which happens on the blockchain. With on-chain governance, the proposed protocol changes are already written in code and implemented automatically if the stakeholders approve the changes.
> 
> Whilst at a protocol level, Ethereum uses off-chain governance, many use cases built on top of Ethereum, such as DAOs, use on-chain governance.

Amended:

> Blockchain technology allows for new governance capabilities, known as on-chain governance. On-chain governance is when proposed protocol changes are decided by a stakeholder vote, usually by holders of a governance token, and voting happens on the blockchain. With on-chain governance, the proposed protocol changes are already written in code and implemented automatically if the stakeholders approve the changes.
> 
> The opposite approach, off-chain governance, is where any protocol change decisions happen through an informal process of social discussion, which, if approved, would be implemented in code.
> 
> **Ethereum governance happens off-chain** with a wide variety of stakeholders involved in the process.
> 
> _Whilst at a protocol level Ethereum governance is off-chain, many use cases built on top of Ethereum, such as DAOs, use on-chain governance._

Ethereum Governance happens off-chain. Off-chain governance means that any protocol change decisions happen through an informal process of social discussion, which, if approved, would be implemented in code.

The opposite approach, on-chain governance, is when proposed protocol changes are decided by a stakeholder vote, usually by holders of a governance token, which happens on the blockchain. With on-chain governance, the proposed protocol changes are already written in code and implemented automatically if the stakeholders approve the changes.

Whilst at a protocol level, Ethereum uses off-chain governance, many use cases built on top of Ethereum, such as DAOs, use on-chain governance.

<ButtonLink to="/dao/">More on DAOs</ButtonLink>

<Divider />

> ## Who is involved? {#who-is-involved}

Reviewer: I'd might reorganize this list to sort by what are likely the most common to match with the visitor, e.g. so "ether holders" at the top & "protocol developers" towards the bottom.

Reviewer 2: I think that makes sense. You can go from the outside in

> There are various stakeholders in the Ethereum community, each playing a role in the governance process. Starting from the stakeholders closest to the protocol and zooming out, we have:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are various stakeholders in the [Ethereum community](/community/), each playing a role in the governance process. Starting from the stakeholders closest to the protocol and zooming out, we have:
```

> - **Protocol Developers** (a.k.a. "Core Developers" ): these people maintain the various Ethereum implementations (e.g. go-ethereum, Nethermind, Besu, Erigon at the execution layer or Prysm, Lighthouse, Nimbus, Teku, Lodestar at the consensus layer);

Reviewer: Perhaps link to "more on Ethereum clients" that explain what implementations of Ethereum means? https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/

Reviewer: Not sure if it's worth mentioning that even the definition of core dev is debated, e.g. https://hudsonjameson.com/2020-06-22-what-is-an-ethereum-core-developer/

Author: > Not sure if it's worth mentioning that even the definition of core dev is debated, e.g.

Yeah... I don't think it is a rabbit hole we should send users down at this point in their journey. Could link out to in further reading maybe?

> - **EIP Authors**: these people propose changes to the Ethereum protocol, in the form of Ethereum Improvement Proposals (EIPs);

Reviewer: I think worth noting that anyone can be an EIP author. Could also link to "more on EIPS": https://ethereum.org/en/eips/

Author: > I think worth noting that anyone can be an EIP author.

Do you think it being explained in the following section (What is an EIP?) is enough?

> Could also link to "more on EIPS":

Added

Reviewer: Ya good call, I think the section below addresses this.

- **Miners/Validators**: these people run nodes that can add new blocks to the Ethereum blockchain;

> - **Node Operators**: these people run nodes that propagate blocks and transactions, rejecting any invalid transaction or block that they come across;

Reviewer: Worth mentioning that anyone can run a node? Could also link to "more on how to run a node" https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/run-a-node/

> - **Application/Tooling Developers**: these people write applications that are run on the Ethereum blockchain (e.g. DeFi, NFTs, etc.) or build tooling to interact with Ethereum (e.g. wallets, test suites, etc.);

Reviewer: "More on dapps" link? https://ethereum.org/en/dapps/

- **Application Users**: these people interact with applications on the Ethereum blockchain;

> - **Ether holders**: these people own the ETH token.

Reviewer: "More on ETH" https://ethereum.org/en/eth/

The formal process for introducing changes to the Ethereum protocol is as follows:

1. **Propose a Core EIP**: as described in [EIP-1](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1#core-eips), the first step to formally proposing a change to Ethereum is to detail it in a Core EIP. This will act as the official specification for an EIP that Protocol Developers will implement if accepted.

2. **Present your EIP to Protocol Developers**: once you have a Core EIP, you should get feedback on it from Protocol Developers. You can get feedback can by proposing it for discussion on an [AllCoreDevs call](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs/tree/master/network-upgrades#getting-the-considered-for-inclusion-cfi-status). Alternatively, discussion can happen asynchronously on the [Ethereum Magician's forum](https://ethereum-magicians.org/) or in the [Ethereum R&D Discord](https://discord.gg/mncqtgVSVw).

> Potential outcomes of this stage are:

> - The EIP will be considered for a future network upgrade
> - Technical changes will be requested
> - It may be rejected if it is not a priority or the improvement is not large enough relative to the development effort.

> 3. **[Optional] Gather Community Consensus for your EIP**: some EIPs are purely technical changes with little room for debate, but others can be more contentious. If the EIP is in the latter category, Protocol Developers will likely want to see strong evidence of overwhelming community support before proceeding with it. There is no "one size fits all" approach here, as each EIP is unique.

Reviewer: Should this step happen before presenting to protocol devs? Seems like building some amount of community support for you idea should happen first to ensure an EIP is seriously considered.

Author: Not sure. @timbeiko any thoughts here?

Reviewer 3: I would actually prefer removing this section entirely.  It is impossible to prove that you have "community consensus", and it is fairly easy to make it appear that someone else doesn't have "community consensus".  While advertising/advocating for an EIP is valuable in terms of attracting the right talent to work on it and/or making people aware of potential future changes, Ethereum's governance process is not a popularity contest and that is the only thing a step like this achieves.

Reviewer: I agree @MicahZoltu but to your point above:

> We should be having people get feedback from the community prior to AllCoreDevs call.

Seems like we should have some step 2. before "Present your EIP to Protocol Developers" - any suggestion here? Perhaps we rephrase this step 3. to "Gather Community Feedback for your EIP" & move it before the ACD step?

Reviewer 2: ~~I proposed another bullet for community feedback pre-ACD calls. I'm not sure what to do of this section. For larger EIPs, there definitely is a sort of "community consensus" bit once ACD is somewhat in favor. 1559, 3074 and ProgPoW all arguable spent most of their time in this zone. How would you frame that, @MicahZoltu ?~~

I'm fine moving everything "community consensus" related to the section below. But, there should probably be another bullet that explains the technical back and forth that will happen on an EIP from the first presentation on AllCoreDevs to getting included in an upgrade. Something like:

> **Iterate towards a final proposal**: After receiving feedback from all relevant stakeholders, you will likely need to make changes to your initial proposal to improve its security, better meet the needs of various users, etc. Once your EIP has incorporated all the changes you believe are necessary, you will need to present it again to Protocol Developers. You will then either move to the next step of this process, or new concerns will be raised which will require another round of iterations on your proposal.

> 4. **EIP Included in Network Upgrade**: assuming the EIP is approved, tested and implemented, it gets scheduled as part of a network upgrade. Given the high coordination costs of network upgrades (everyone needs to upgrade simultaneously), EIPs are generally bundled together in upgrades.

Reviewer: I wonder to what degree we should explain how updates occur through forks & what a soft vs. hard fork is 🤔 

At the very least we should probably link to https://ethereum.org/en/history/ which explains forks a bit.

Reviewer 2: Hmm yeah, it feels like this is a tangent but an important one. I think it may be worth adding a paragraph to the "What are forks?" sections of /history which explains Ethereum's preference (and need!) for hard vs. soft forks. 

Vitalik has a good article on this: https://vitalik.ca/general/2017/03/14/forks_and_markets.html 

The most important bits IMO:
* Hard forks are needed to add anything which _expands_  or _changes_ the consensus rules, which is the default case for most EIPs (e.g. add a feature, raise a gas cost);
* Soft forks are only useful if you are strictly restricting the rules of the network (e.g. cap the block gas limit in protocol).

5. **Network Upgrade Activated**: after the network upgrade is activated, the EIP will be live on the Ethereum network. _Note: network upgrades are usually activated on testnets before being activated on the Ethereum Mainnet._

This flow, while very simplified, gives an overview of the significant stages for a protocol change to be activated on Ethereum. Now, let's look at the informal factors at play during this process.

## Informal Process {#informal-process}

### Understanding Prior Work {#prior-work}

> EIP Champions should familiarise themselves with prior work and proposals before having an EIP, which can be seriously considered for deployment on the Ethereum Mainnet. This way, the EIP hopefully brings something new which hasn't been rejected before. The three main places to research this are the [EIP repository](https://github.com/ethereum/eips), [Ethereum Magicians](https://www.ethereum-magicians.org/) and [ethresear.ch](https://www.ethresear.ch/).

Reviewer: "before having an EIP"? Not sure I follow what that means. Before creating an EIP?

> EIP Champions should familiarise themselves with prior work and proposals before having an EIP, which can be seriously considered for deployment on the Ethereum Mainnet. This way, the EIP hopefully brings something new which hasn't been rejected before. The three main places to research this are the [EIP repository](https://github.com/ethereum/eips), [Ethereum Magicians](https://www.ethereum-magicians.org/) and [ethresear.ch](https://www.ethresear.ch/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EIP Champions should familiarise themselves with prior work and proposals before creating an EIP which can be seriously considered for deployment on the Ethereum Mainnet. This way, the EIP hopefully brings something new which hasn't been rejected before. The three main places to research this are the [EIP repository](https://github.com/ethereum/eips), [Ethereum Magicians](https://www.ethereum-magicians.org/) and [ethresear.ch](https://www.ethresear.ch/).
```

### Working Groups {#working-groups}

> It is unrealistic to expect that the initial EIP will be included on the Ethereum Mainnet without change for more significant initiatives. In practice, these will require EIP Champions to work with a subset of Protocol Developers to specify, implement, test, iterate on and finalize their proposal. Historically, these working groups have involved several months (and sometimes years!) of work. Similarly, EIP Champions for such changes should involve relevant Application/Tooling Developers early in their efforts to gather end-user feedback and mitigate any deployment risks.

Reviewer: > It is unrealistic to expect that the initial EIP will be included on the Ethereum Mainnet without change for more significant initiatives.

This sentence feels a bit weird. Are you saying that proposals for significant changes are unlikely to be included as-is, without edits?

### Community Consensus {#community-consensus}

> Unfortunately, there is no clear playbook on how to handle contentious proposals. Because they have no way to force people to adopt network upgrades, Protocol Developers will generally avoid including EIPs who are contentious amongst various stakeholder groups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, there is no clear playbook on how to handle contentious proposals. Since they have no way to force people to adopt network upgrades, Protocol Developers will generally avoid including EIPs that are contentious amongst various stakeholder groups.
```

As the champion of a contentious EIP, you should try and build consensus, address objections and document community support for your proposal. Given the size and diversity of the Ethereum community, there isn't a single metric (e.g. a coin vote) that can be used, and EIP Champions are expected to adapt to the circumstances of their proposal.

> Beyond the security of the Ethereum network, which contentious forks may compromise, significant weight is usually placed on what Application/Tooling Developers and Application Users value, given that their using and developing on Ethereum is what makes the ecosystem attractive for other stakeholders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Beyond the security of the Ethereum network, significant weight is usually placed on what Application/Tooling Developers and Application Users value, given that their using and developing on Ethereum is what makes the ecosystem attractive for other stakeholders.
```

Author: Yeah this doesn't add much

<Divider />

## Handling disagreements {#disagreements}

> Having many stakeholders with different motivations and beliefs means that disagreements are not uncommon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having [many stakeholders](/community/) with different motivations and beliefs means that disagreements are not uncommon.
```

Author: I think this link is a bit distracting. A user would click on it expecting to see more specific stakeholder information but instead, get the less specific community page.

> Generally, disagreements are handled with long-form discussion to understand the root of the problem. Typically, one group concedes, or a happy medium is achieved. If one group feels strongly enough, implementing a particular change on Ethereum could result in a split chain.

Reviewer: Should we briefly explain a "chain split", i.e. when different (incompatible) versions of the protocol are operated, which results in 2 distinct blockchains?

### The DAO fork {#dao-fork}

> The DAO fork was in response to the [2016 DAO attack](https://www.coindesk.com/understanding-dao-hack-journalists) where an insecure [DAO](/glossary/#dao) contract was drained of over 3.6 million ETH in a hack. The fork moved the funds from the faulty contract to a new contract allowing anyone who lost funds in the hack to recover them.

Reviewer: Again we haven't really explained what the heck a fork is.

Some miners refused to fork because the DAO incident wasn't a defect in the protocol. They went on to form [Ethereum Classic](https://ethereumclassic.org/).

Watch more on the DAO hack:

<iframe width="100%" height="315px" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/rNeLuBOVe8A" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<Divider />

## Beacon Chain Development {#beacon-chain}

The Ethereum governance process often trades off speed and efficiency for openness and inclusivity. In order to accelerate the development of the Beacon Chain, it was launched separately from the proof of work Ethereum network and followed its own governance practices.

While the specification and implementations development has always been fully open source, the formal processes used to propose updates described above weren't used. This allowed changes to be specified and agreed upon quicker by researchers and implementers.

> When the Beacon Chain merges with the Ethereum execution layer, the governance process to propose changes will be harmonized.

Reviewer: Perhaps we should say this is already happening, e.g. how the merge as already been created as an EIP: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/3675

Author: Agree. This info is also missing from the actual merge page.

Reviewer 2: Another thing you can add here is that we are creating beacon chain-like specs for the execution layer too, see: https://ethereum.github.io/execution-specs/

Reviewer 4: does this mean that the EIP process will be deprecated?

Reviewer 2: Not necessarily, but it could look something like consensus changes also needing an EIP for a description (not currently the case) and/or execution changes needing a PR to the specs with the technical details (again, not currently the case). That's my favoured approach, but obviously it will need to be discussed further.

<ButtonLink to="/eth2/merge/">More on the merge</ButtonLink>

<Divider />

## How can I get involved? {#get-involved}

- [Propose an EIP](/eips/#participate)
- [Discuss current proposals](https://ethereum-magicians.org/)
- [Get involved in R&D discussion](https://discord.gg/mncqtgVSVw)
- [Run a node](/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/)

> 

Reviewer: Contribute to client development / become a core developer?

Author: @samajammin any suggested place to link?

Author: @samajammin anywhere you would suggest to link out to? One place I can think of is the [core dev apprenticeship program ](https://blog.ethereum.org/2021/05/13/core-dev-apprenticeship/) (if they plan on continuing, which I think they are)

Author: Seems like cohort 1 applications [start on Monday](https://discord.com/channels/595666850260713488/843176491386667018/882419405559046214)

Reviewer: I think linking to the projects might be adequate, i.e. https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/#clients

All these projects are open source & welcome contributions.

<Divider />

## Decentralized Governance {#decentalized-governance}

No one person owns the Ethereum protocol, but decisions still need to be made about implementing changes to best ensure the longevity and prosperity of the network. This lack of ownership makes traditional organizational governance an incompatible solution.

## Ethereum Governance {#ethereum-governance}

Ethereum governance is the process by which protocol changes are made. It's important to point out that this process isn't related to how people and applications use the protocol - Ethereum is permissionless. Anyone from anywhere in the world can participate in on-chain activities. There are no rules set for who can or cannot build an application or send a transaction. However, there is a process to propose changes to the core protocol, which these applications run on top of. Since so many people depend on Ethereum's stability, there is a very high coordination threshold for core changes, including social and technical processes, to ensure any changes to Ethereum are secure and widely supported by the community

### On-chain vs Off-chain governance {#on-chain-vs-off-chain}

> Blockchain technology allows for new governance capabilities, known as on-chain governance. On-chain governance is when proposed protocol changes are decided by a stakeholder vote, usually by holders of a governance token, and voting happens on the blockchain. With on-chain governance, the proposed protocol changes are already written in code and implemented automatically if the stakeholders approve the changes.

Author: Do you think saying **with most** here is ok?

> Blockchain technology allows for new governance capabilities, known as on-chain governance. On-chain governance is when proposed protocol changes are decided by a stakeholder vote, usually by holders of a governance token, and voting happens on the blockchain. With on-chain governance, the proposed protocol changes are already written in code and implemented automatically if the stakeholders approve the changes.

Reviewer 4: i only know of Tezos automatically upgrading this way, are there others?

> Blockchain technology allows for new governance capabilities, known as on-chain governance. On-chain governance is when proposed protocol changes are decided by a stakeholder vote, usually by holders of a governance token, and voting happens on the blockchain. With on-chain governance, the proposed protocol changes are already written in code and implemented automatically if the stakeholders approve the changes.

Author: Ah, I thought you were saying only some had votes with governance tokens. Don't know what I was thinking - my bad.

- **Application/Tooling Developers**: these people write applications that are run on the Ethereum blockchain (e.g. DeFi, NFTs, etc.) or build tooling to interact with Ethereum (e.g. wallets, test suites, etc.). [More on dapps](/dapps/).
- **Application Users**: these people interact with applications on the Ethereum blockchain.
- **Ether holders**: these people own the ETH token. [More on ETH](/eth/).

_Note: any individual can be part of multiple of these groups (e.g. a protocol developer could champion an EIP, and run a beacon chain validator, and use DeFi applications). For conceptual clarity, it is easiest to distinguish between them, though._

<Divider />

## What is an EIP? {#what-is-an-eip}

One important process used in Ethereum governance is the proposal of **Ethereum Improvement Proposals (EIPs)**. EIPs are standards specifying potential new features or processes for Ethereum. Anyone within the Ethereum community can create an EIP. For example, none of the authors of EIP-721, the EIP that standardized NFTs, have worked directly on Ethereum's protocol development.

> <ButtonLink to="/eips/">More on EIPs</ButtonLink>

Reviewer 3: This (and others like it) feels more appropriate as an inline lines rather than separate buttons at the end of the section.  Hyperlinked text is pretty standard across the web, so it is unclear why we are doing a sort of "references" at the end of each section.

<Divider />

## The Formal Process {#formal-process}

The formal process for introducing changes to the Ethereum protocol is as follows:

1. **Propose a Core EIP**: as described in [EIP-1](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1#core-eips), the first step to formally proposing a change to Ethereum is to detail it in a Core EIP. This will act as the official specification for an EIP that Protocol Developers will implement if accepted.

> 2. **Present your EIP to Protocol Developers**: once you have a Core EIP, you should get feedback on it from Protocol Developers. You can get feedback can by proposing it for discussion on an [AllCoreDevs call](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs/tree/master/network-upgrades#getting-the-considered-for-inclusion-cfi-status). Alternatively, discussion can happen asynchronously on the [Ethereum Magician's forum](https://ethereum-magicians.org/) or in the [Ethereum R&D Discord](https://discord.gg/mncqtgVSVw).

Reviewer 3: We should be having people get feedback from the community prior to AllCoreDevs call.  The AllCoreDevs call is a very expensive call, and we want things to show up there only after they are in a very healthy place and have received and applied one or more rounds of feedback.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, we can add another bullet point. Something like:

> 2. **Gather feedback from the community**: Once your EIP has been drafted, you should gather feedback from relevant stakeholders in the community. The amount and variety of feedback will be proportional to the scope and size of your proposed change. Good starting points for this are Ethereum Magicians, ethresear.ch and/or reaching out to projects you think may be directly affected by your EIP.

Reviewer 2: Then, we can modify this bullet: 
```suggestion
3. **Present your EIP to Protocol Developers**: once you have a Core EIP for which you've gathered community input, you should present it to Protocol Developers. You can do so by proposing it for discussion on an [AllCoreDevs call](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs/tree/master/network-upgrades#getting-the-considered-for-inclusion-cfi-status). It is likely some discussions will have already happened asynchronously on the [Ethereum Magician's forum](https://ethereum-magicians.org/) or in the [Ethereum R&D Discord](https://discord.gg/mncqtgVSVw).
```

### Community Consensus {#community-consensus}

Unfortunately, there is no clear playbook on how to handle contentious proposals. Since they have no way to force people to adopt network upgrades, Protocol Developers will generally avoid including EIPs that are contentious amongst various stakeholder groups.

As the champion of a contentious EIP, you should try and build consensus, address objections and document community support for your proposal. Given the size and diversity of the Ethereum community, there isn't a single metric (e.g. a coin vote) that can be used, and EIP Champions are expected to adapt to the circumstances of their proposal.

Beyond the security of the Ethereum network, significant weight is usually placed on what Application/Tooling Developers and Application Users value, given that their using and developing on Ethereum is what makes the ecosystem attractive for other stakeholders.

<Divider />

> 

Reviewer 3: Same comment as above regarding "community consensus".  Suggesting to people that this is a requirement and/or will help an EIP (if achieved) or harm an EIP (if it is failed to be achieved) just results in a bunch of people trying to be very loud about their feelings about a particular change.

I think we should strongly encourage people to solicit feedback from different stakeholders, but at the same time I think we should make it clear to readers that they don't need to go out and *sell* their change to the community, and they don't need to go out and convince everyone to hate a particular EIP.

I think the last sentence here would be good as a comment on what core developers have historically favored, which is a section here that I think is missing.  As part of the informal process, you *do* need to convince someone to implement your change in each of the major Ethereum clients.  Part of this process usually means convincing core developers that a particular change is valuable and showing how it helps end-users or solves a security issue can assist in that.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, this is a murky section to write. Here is a changed one. LMK what you think:

```suggestion
### Community Consensus {#community-consensus}

While some EIPs are straightforward technical improvements with minimal nuance, some are more complex and inherently tradeoffs which will affect different stakeholders in different ways. This means some EIPs end up being more contentious within the community than others. 

Unfortunately, there is no clear playbook on how to handle contentious proposals. Since they have no way to force people to adopt network upgrades, Protocol Developers will generally avoid including EIPs that are contentious amongst various stakeholder groups.

As the champion of a contentious EIP, you should try and address objections to build consensus around your EIP. Given the size and diversity of the Ethereum community, there isn't a single metric (e.g. a coin vote) that can be used to gauge community consensus, and EIP Champions are expected to adapt to the circumstances of their proposal. This being said, EIP Champions are expected to solicit feedback from all relevant stakeholders.

Beyond the security of the Ethereum network, significant weight has historically been placed by Protocol Developers on what Application/Tooling Developers and Application Users value, given that their using and developing on Ethereum is what makes the ecosystem attractive for other stakeholders. Additionally, EIPs need to be implemented across all client implementations. Part of this process usually means convincing Protocol Developers that a particular change is valuable and showing how it helps end-users or solves a security issue can assist in that.

<Divider />

```

## Handling disagreements {#disagreements}

Having many stakeholders with different motivations and beliefs means that disagreements are not uncommon.

> Generally, disagreements are handled with long-form discussion to understand the root of the problem. Typically, one group concedes, or a happy medium is achieved. If one group feels strongly enough, forcing through a particular change could result in a split chain. A split chain is when some stakeholders protest implementing a protocol change resulting in different, incompatible versions of the protocol operating, from which two distinct blockchains emerge.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Generally, disagreements are handled with long-form discussion to understand the root of the problem. Typically, one group concedes, or a happy medium is achieved. If one group feels strongly enough, forcing through a particular change could result in a chain split. A chain split is when some stakeholders protest implementing a protocol change resulting in different, incompatible versions of the protocol operating, from which two distinct blockchains emerge.
```

### The DAO fork {#dao-fork}

> Forks are when major technical upgrades or changes need to be made to the network and change the "rules" of the protocol. [Ethereum clients](/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/) must update their software to implement the new fork rules.

Reviewer 4: i'd lay out what forks actually refer to. Network upgrades are defined above in step #4 under **the formal process**

"Sometimes, network upgrades are contentious: these can lead to what are known as "forks:" a point where two sets of nodes start running client software with incompatible protocol rules. Once this happens, the chain splits into two separate pieces, with their own unique histories. Hard Forks are not very common occurrence, but are impactful when they do happen."

The DAO fork was in response to the [2016 DAO attack](https://www.coindesk.com/understanding-dao-hack-journalists) where an insecure [DAO](/glossary/#dao) contract was drained of over 3.6 million ETH in a hack. The fork moved the funds from the faulty contract to a new contract allowing anyone who lost funds in the hack to recover them.

> This course of action was voted on by the Ethereum community. Any ETH holder was able to vote via a transaction on [a voting platform](http://v1.carbonvote.com/). The decision to fork reached over 85% of the votes.

Reviewer 3: I don't know that there is value mentioning the coin vote in this particular document for a few reasons:
1. The turnout was *incredibly* low.  If there was a quorum requirement, it definitely wouldn't have been reached.
2. Most people didn't know the coinvote was happening.
3. The coinvote only represents ETH holders, not any of the other participants in the system.
4. I may be mis-remembering, but I don't think it was a significant determining factor in the decision making process (for many of the reasons above).

Essentially, it is a great example of how Ethereum *doesn't* do governance, and I think putting it in this document just runs contrary to the goals of educating users on how Ethereum governance works.

Reviewer 2: I think it's valuable to keep it there, but agreed it should be listed as _one part_ of the governance process and not necessarily the main thing that led to the decision. Perhaps someone with better historical context can chime in...

Reviewer 4: yeah, i lean towards not including the coinvote as well

Author: Added this for clarity. Does this solve the concerns here?

> This course of action was voted on by the Ethereum community. Any ETH holder was able to vote via a transaction on [a voting platform](http://v1.carbonvote.com/). The decision to fork reached over 85% of the votes.
>
> It's important to note that whilst the protocol did fork to revert the hack, the weight the vote carried in deciding to fork is debatable for several reasons:
>
> - The turnout to vote was incredibly low
> - Most people didn't know the vote was happening
> - The vote only represented ETH holders, not any of the other participants in the system

Author: > Essentially, it is a great example of how Ethereum doesn't do governance, and I think putting it in this document just runs contrary to the goals of educating users on how Ethereum governance works.

Maybe we could use the above to segway into an explanation that Ethereum governance is an ever-evolving process and mistakes were made (coinvote)

> Some miners refused to fork because the DAO incident wasn't a defect in the protocol. They went on to form [Ethereum Classic](https://ethereumclassic.org/).

Reviewer 3: The specific call out of miners here should be removed.  People from all groups refused to update their clients (core developers, app developers, miners, users, and ETH holders) continued to use both Ethereum and Ethereum Classic after the fork.  If it was only miners that forked then Ethereum Classic wouldn't have prospered like it did.

Reviewer 2: +1. AIUI, the fork wasn't initiated by miners, but by various parties who told miners they would buy their coins on the ETC chain, hence creating an economic opportunity for them to keep mining there. I would rephrase as "A subset of the community refused to fork, largely because they felt the DAO incident wasn't a defect in the protocol."

Reviewer 4: +1 - something along the lines of 

".. wasn't a defect in the protocol. Today, the Ethereum community has adopted a policy of non-intervention in cases of contract bugs or lost funds to maintain the credible neutrality of the system."

Watch more on the DAO hack:

<iframe width="100%" height="315px" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/rNeLuBOVe8A" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

> <Divider />

Reviewer 3: I think there is significant value in mentioning here that the Ethereum/Ethereum Classif fork is a great example of a healthy fork.  We had two groups who disagreed strongly enough with each other on some core values so as to feel it was worth the loss of network effects (for all of Ethereum) to pursue their specific courses of action.

The fact that people *can* fork is a big part of why Ethereum governance works, and there is great value in making new users of the platform aware of that mechanism.  This example is a pristine example of that in action, and has great educational value that I think we should leverage.

Author: Added this section after the DAO fork section:

> ### The utility of forking {#forking-utility}
> 
> The Ethereum/Ethereum Classic fork is an excellent example of a healthy fork. We had two groups who disagreed strongly enough with each other on some core values to feel it was worth the risks involved to pursue their specific courses of action.
>
> The ability to fork in the face of significant political, philosophical or economic differences plays a large part in the success of Ethereum governance. Without the ability to fork the alternative was ongoing in-fighting, forced reluctant participation for those who eventually formed Ethereum Classic and an increasingly differing vision of how success for Ethereum looks.

## Beacon Chain Development {#beacon-chain}

The Ethereum governance process often trades off speed and efficiency for openness and inclusivity. In order to accelerate the development of the Beacon Chain, it was launched separately from the proof of work Ethereum network and followed its own governance practices.

While the specification and implementations development has always been fully open source, the formal processes used to propose updates described above weren't used. This allowed changes to be specified and agreed upon quicker by researchers and implementers.

When the Beacon Chain merges with the Ethereum execution layer, the governance process to propose changes will be harmonized.

<ButtonLink to="/eth2/merge/">More on the merge</ButtonLink>

<Divider />

## How can I get involved? {#get-involved}

- [Propose an EIP](/eips/#participate)
- [Discuss current proposals](https://ethereum-magicians.org/)
- [Get involved in R&D discussion](https://discord.gg/mncqtgVSVw)

> - [Run a node](/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Run a node](/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/run-a-node/)
```

## Further reading {#further-reading}

Governance in Ethereum isn’t rigidly defined. Various community participants have diverse perspectives on it. Here are a few of them:

- [Governance on Ethereum](https://docs.ethhub.io/ethereum-basics/governance/) – _ETHHub_
- [How does Ethereum Governance work?](https://cryptotesters.com/blog/ethereum-governance) – _Cryptotesters_

> - [How Ethereum governance works](https://medium.com/coinmonks/how-ethereum-governance-works-71856426b63a) – _Micah Zoltu_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [How Ethereum governance works](https://medium.com/coinmonks/how-ethereum-governance-works-71856426b63a) – _Micah Zoltu_
- [What is an Ethereum core developer?](https://hudsonjameson.com/2020-06-22-what-is-an-ethereum-core-developer/)
```

### Working Groups {#working-groups}

The initial draft of an EIP is unlikely to be implemented on the Ethereum Mainnet without edits or changes. Generally, EIP Champions will work with a subset of Protocol Developers to specify, implement, test, iterate, and finalize their proposal. Historically, these working groups have required several months (and sometimes years!) of work. Similarly, EIP Champions for such changes should involve relevant Application/Tooling Developers early in their efforts to gather end-user feedback and mitigate any deployment risks.

### Community Consensus {#community-consensus}

While some EIPs are straightforward technical improvements with minimal nuance, some are more complex and inherently tradeoffs which will affect different stakeholders in different ways. This means some EIPs end up being more contentious within the community than others.

> Unfortunately, there is no clear playbook on how to handle contentious proposals. Since they have no way to force people to adopt network upgrades, Protocol Developers will generally avoid including EIPs where the contentiousness outweighs the benefits to the broader community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no clear playbook on how to handle contentious proposals. Since they have no way to force people to adopt network upgrades, Protocol Developers will generally avoid including EIPs where the contentiousness outweighs the benefits to the broader community.
```

> As the champion of a contentious EIP, you should try and address objections to build consensus around your EIP. Given the size and diversity of the Ethereum community, there isn't a single metric (e.g. a coin vote) that can be used to gauge community consensus, and EIP Champions are expected to adapt to the circumstances of their proposal. This being said, EIP Champions are expected to solicit feedback from all relevant stakeholders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EIP Champions are expected to solicit feedback from all relevant stakeholders. If you find yourself the champion of a contentious EIP, you should try and address objections to build consensus around your EIP. Given the size and diversity of the Ethereum community, there isn't a single metric (e.g. a coin vote) that can be used to gauge community consensus, and EIP Champions are expected to adapt to the circumstances of their proposal.
```

> Beyond the security of the Ethereum network, significant weight has historically been placed by Protocol Developers on what Application/Tooling Developers and Application Users value, given that their using and developing on Ethereum is what makes the ecosystem attractive for other stakeholders. Additionally, EIPs need to be implemented across all client implementations. Part of this process usually means convincing Protocol Developers that a particular change is valuable and showing how it helps end-users or solves a security issue can assist in that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Beyond the security of the Ethereum network, significant weight has historically been placed by Protocol Developers on what Application/Tooling Developers and Application Users value, given that their using and developing on Ethereum is what makes the ecosystem attractive for other stakeholders. Additionally, EIPs need to be implemented across all client implementations, which are managed by distinct teams. Part of this process usually means convincing multiple teams of Protocol Developers that a particular change is valuable and that it helps end-users or solves a security issue.
```

<Divider />

## Handling disagreements {#disagreements}

Having many stakeholders with different motivations and beliefs means that disagreements are not uncommon.

> Generally, disagreements are handled with long-form discussion to understand the root of the problem. Typically, one group concedes, or a happy medium is achieved. If one group feels strongly enough, forcing through a particular change could result in a chain split. A chain split is when some stakeholders protest implementing a protocol change resulting in different, incompatible versions of the protocol operating, from which two distinct blockchains emerge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, disagreements are handled with long-form discussion in public forums to understand the root of the problem and allow anyone to weigh in. Typically, one group concedes, or a happy medium is achieved. If one group feels strongly enough, forcing through a particular change could result in a chain split. A chain split is when some stakeholders protest implementing a protocol change resulting in different, incompatible versions of the protocol operating, from which two distinct blockchains emerge.
```
